Texas A&M since 1969.
It's November the 13th, Friday. Okay. And I'm
interviewing Dr. Shules, who has been at Texas A&M
since 1969. That's correct. And has been in the
Department of Educational Curriculum and
Instruction and is still a professor here, among a
lot of other things that he does. I'd like to talk to
you, Dr. Schuetz, about the major changes that you
have experienced or have you been a part of since
you came to Texas A&M, some of the causes that you
feel might have brought about these changes. And
then we'll talk a little bit about the goals or the
mission of the college. So looking back to 1969
when you arrived, from Stanford? No, you went? I
was in Palo Alto Unified School District. in
California. But I did my doctoral study and
master's study at Stanford. Right. OK. And was
Dean Hubert responsible for you coming here? Dean
Hubert and Glenn Johnson. I had somebody quote or
tell me that 90% of the people that Dean Hubert had
hired were still here and were still productive.
And when I wrote that up in one of my class reports,
Dr. Erlandson said, have you verified this or
triangulated and make sure? And I haven't gone
through the records, and I guess I'll have to. It
might have just been something that this person
just assumed or just from thinking. I don't know if
90% was an accurate figure, but there are quite a
few people in the College of Education today that
were here. In fact, all of my interviews so far have
been people that were here, and it was like over 20.
And that's amazing. And, of course, the college is
not that old, but still, we're going to be hitting
20 years pretty soon. That's right. This is its
19th year. And it's been tremendous fun to be in a
ground floor of a whole new institution. The
College of Education was born in 1969. The
Department of Curriculum and Instruction was
born in 1969. And all of the The structure,
the precedents for the college had to be
established. That's right. And if a person had
gone to the University of Illinois or Stanford or
someplace where the precedents had been 50 or 100
years old, you would have waited for 50 years to get
a chance to influence something. But those of us
who came in 69 had a chance to start right in doing
it. And it was great fun. We took on
responsibilities that were more than we knew how
to handle. But we learned. I still remember Gwen
Johnson, the first year as department head. He had
so much to learn, he just couldn't do it all. And he
would stay up all night long trying to get things
done. And he would go home and take a shower and
shave, come back to work at 6 o'clock in the
morning. And we just got on his case. I told him he
just couldn't do that. But he would keep saying, I
have to know these things. I have to be responsible
for these things. I was not aware that the
Department of EDCI was also born at the same time.
Tell me a little bit about how that came about.
Well, before the College of Education was born,
There was, in the College of Liberal Arts, a
Department of Education. There was, in the
College of Agriculture, a Department of
Agricultural Education. There was a Department
of Health and Physical Education. I'm not sure
where it was housed. It might have been in Liberal
Arts, but I don't know. And then one in Engineering
as well. And that was Industrial Arts. When the
college came into being, the Department of
Education split into educational
administration, curriculum and instruction,
and educational psychology.
And then after that,
at the same time, industrial education moved over
to education from engineering.
And after that time, we invented
interdisciplinary education. And things like
adult education and vocational education
somehow got added in, and educational technology
got added in. When you say we invented, what kind of
process did you go through, or how did this come
about? Was it the faculty as a whole interacting
with the dean to try to meet the needs at works? How
did that happen?
It wasn't the faculty as a whole. It wasn't all the
departments involved. It wasn't all the
departments in the college. It was the ones that
were particularly involved. There were
funding agencies that were asking for proposals
or where there were funds available to get things
started up, particularly vocational education
is something that I remember. or where there was
some new development as in educational
technology that one particular department, in
this case, industrial education, felt was
important. So they simply tacked on to themselves
this
activity that didn't have a direct relationship
to their ongoing traditional program. But yes,
department heads, faculty members were well
involved in working with the dean, talking with
the dean about such developments. And he was
always looking for ways to encourage the
strengthening and attention of the application
and its horizons.
There have been, and I'm going to divide this into
the two distinct administrations, you know,
Hubert for 10 years almost, and then now Dean
Corrigan since 1980. Were there changes in the
focus of, you know, the mission is still the same,
the teaching and research and the service. Was
that in equal proportion in the two eras, or has it
changed any?
As far as more emphasis on either teaching or
research or service? The emphasis has changed. I
think the methodology has changed. I think the
tile of leadership has changed. The measures of
success have maybe changed. You have to remember,
Dean Hubert came to the Deanship in Education
after a preceding decade as the Dean of Liberal
Arts. And before that, the Dean of Arts and
Sciences. And so he had a view of the possible based
upon
considerable history of time with an institution
that was pretty conservative in its outlook and
its operation. he kind of brought that into his
leadership in the College of Education
transcended the conservatism to the degree that
he had visions of development and expansion that
went way beyond what other deans would have
thought about, I'm sure, in terms of the College of
Education. Corrigan came in with a completely
different set of experiences, different
institutions, and things that Dean Huber would
have said, no, it can't be done to. Corrigan has
said, I'm going to find out. That's the way we used
to do it in Massachusetts or Vermont or wherever he
came from.
Right.
He never took no for an answer, so to speak, at the
beginning of things. He always took the more
optimistic view. And whereas Dean Hubert was
insistent that we had to be getting into the
research and development game with outside
funding, his measure of success was pretty much
the dollars attracted. Hubert's was? Yes. Okay.
And I think that's rather natural when you're
beginning something. You say, well, how are we
doing? Well, how many bucks have we got?
But as the college has matured some, I think...
faculty began to be ready to reach out in different
directions and to make different kinds of
proposals. And so I think the quality of some of
these activities, the originality or creativity
in them has improved to some degree. At least the
diversity in them has improved. And I don't mean
saying that to disparage the work and effort of
people in the first 10 years at all. I just need to
say that the critical mass got bigger and all of a
sudden we were able to do things that we couldn't do
before. You mentioned the measure of success.
How is success measured now? I think it is getting
more and more to be the degree to which we influence
public policy or professional points of view or
the thinking, the philosophy, or the point of view
within the disciplines we represent. In other
words, are we visible in our specialties
nationally?
How does the college measure in that area? Well, if
you compare us in 1969 to 1989, it's day and night.
But I'm quick to say that some of the same people who
were here in 1969 are the ones who are leading the
way in 1989. But they've had time to grow. A lot of
them who carried a lot of the heavy responsibility
for organization and operation and
administrative roles in those years have since
phased out of those and gone into other things and
they have then found the time to do some research
and development and writing and so on that they
didn't have time to do them.
I think we have been able to attract more and more
competent already competent people. We have
actually recruited a number of people at the
associate and full professor levels whose
accomplishments have already been highly
visible and brought them in to supplement what we
were home growing as well. And I think the
combination, the mix, has been very, very
successful. I think that the college has kind of
grown up in that period of time. Its position
within the university has improved steadily. Its
recognition has grown.
A number of people from the college who have served
on university-wide committees and councils of
one kind or another are responsible for improving
the image of education. We've been around long
enough to have served, particularly graduate
faculty members, as graduate council
representatives and sometimes outside members
on committees in other departments, and we have
earned the respect of our colleagues in those
roles.
Our graduates, or let's say our students, our
majors, have been improving in quality and
accomplishment, and they compete effectively
with other students in the university. I remember
a marvelous, marvelous event. Well, at least a
decade. Then Vice President for Academic
Affairs, John Calhoun, noted that there were too
many education majors graduating cum laude,
magna cum laude, and summa cum laude, in his
opinion. He called Dean Hubert over and he said,
Hubert, your standards are too low. You got too
many kids that are graduating with all these high
honors. So Hubert came back and worked with Dr.
Limbacher, who was then his associate dean.
determined that the high grades these students
were making were in the liberal arts and the
sciences and the geosciences and not just in
education. He took that information back and
shoved it under Calhoun's nose and Calhoun shut
up. It was the quality of the kids. Not that they
were being given an easy road.
And that has enhanced our
reputation around the university. There are
still people in the university that look down on
people in education. That's because, I guess,
they have to look down on somebody or to feel good
about themselves.
You're referring to other colleges, people in
other colleges within the university. Yes.
Anybody who is from education is automatically
poorly educated, less competent, more limited in
world view, and culture, and you name it. Are they
verbal? I mean, are they vocal about that? Or is it
just a feeling? Oftentimes. And it's only one in
public forums, one kind or another, committees or
councils, where the representative of education
carries the day by the force of will and logic and
precedent and argument and good persuasion that
they begin to take notice and say, well, gee whiz,
maybe they're not so stupid over there after all.
Well, okay, then... You're talking a lot about
collaboration and work with departments and
committees. To what extent does the College of
Education, in your opinion, collaborate with,
well, within the college with departments and
outside of the college with other colleges? Do you
feel there's a lot, a little, or more than, I know
probably more than you used to?
That's a hard one to answer, Sylvia. I don't think
we are as You're active across departmental lines
as we ought to be. I don't know why. We're busy. All
of us are busy. Let me just show you. This door has
files of all the doctoral committees I'm on. And
I'm cheering now, what is
it? Looks like about 14. And I'm serving on another
I'm
on a GCR on two. And I'm on four or five master's
committees. Is that a norm? I mean, is that an
average for this college? Or is it something about
your expertise that so many of the students want
you on their committees? Well, I think it's not
evenly divided. Not everybody in every
department is so
occupied with committee memberships, but a great
many people are. In your department, there are so
many students and so few faculty members that by
definition, they're all going to be on umpteen
committees.
In this department, there are or maybe eight or
nine of us that have a heavy, heavy load of doctoral
students, either as chairs or memberships. And
then some of the other specializations, there are
enough people to share them fairly well. When you
take on a doctoral student, have you any idea of
what the average amount of time? I know it takes,
what, a couple of years for that person to get
through all the coursework and the dissertation,
et cetera. But in terms of time, I know besides the
committees, I mean, the defenses and the regular
meetings with all the committee, how much time
does it take with each student for counseling, for
review? Those whose committees you chair
takes, by definition, quite a bit of time. Because
first, you're going to do a degree plan with its
contents and the committee membership. That has
to be done. Then you're going to deal, eventually,
with dissertation proposal, and that goes
through several drafts, and then of course it goes
through another. There's the mind, and the chair
pushes the mind, until it finally gets kind of
gelled. dissertation proper, the reviewing of
chapters one at a time, that's just time
consuming. That's all it is. And candidates come
with greater or lesser degrees of competence in
writing, experience in writing. Some people have
never written more than ten pages in their lives.
Tackle something that's going to be sixty to a
hundred pages long. Their sense of organization
is just non-existent. They can't think of it as an
argument that starts on page one and finishes on
page 99 or whatever it is. I had one dean, one of the
deans tell me that he felt that it was unfair or that
it was not right to have people have that many
committees, that it was a great concern of his that
four or five committee or rather graduate
students should be a max, and of course there's no,
that's probably not realistic, but is there talk
about limiting? We've got, in fact, a college, if
not policy, at least a guideline for how many
committees one should serve on. I think there are
10 as a maximum, and serving on another 10 is
exactly what it is. I look it up periodically and I
forget it. But I have finished saying that If just
with those things, the degree plan, the proposal,
and the dissertation, then you have preparation
for those tests, getting the candidate aware of
how it's going to go, what's going to happen, and
who's going to say what. And then there may very
well be some independent study activities, some
685s. And that takes time. Oh, but it's nice. The
thing that's hard to predict is how much
dependence the candidate will have on you. Some of
them require inordinate amounts of time. And
others do everything themselves and show you a
really beautiful copy every time you see it.
That's lovely. OK. We talked already about
perceptions of outsiders, of views. One of the
things that I'm getting from everybody is a little
bit about visions. And because you've been here
from the very beginning and seen how this has
evolved, the visions for maybe the future of the
college. And I know right now there's some
tremendous changes and upheavals, and I know or I
have sense that in this department it would have
much more effect perhaps than in some of the
departments are probably not going to be affected
because they're just graduate students like Ed
Addis. How is that affecting the overall climate?
Well, it's unsettling.
And it remains unsettling because the rules seem
to change every couple weeks. Some kind of message
out of Boston, the dean will meet with a group of
observers and then they're going to respond. And
we'll get going geared up to respond that way and
then new news comes out and the first response will
not be adequate. or it's in the wrong direction, or
we're not sure it will be acceptable, or whatever.
It is unsettling from the standpoint that it's not
clear to many of us what the target is we're trying
to shoot at.
On the other hand, it's a little bit exciting in
that it's forcing a reconceived
conceptualization of our whole program. What
we're doing and how we're doing it is forcing us to
ask ourselves, is the traditional manner in which
we've attacked the problem the best one, the only
one, the most efficient one?
Might there be a better way of doing it? Might there
be a way to improve the quality of the people? We
don't have to be argued with very long. But the
broader the liberal background of the
individual, the better educated he's going to be
as an individual when he leaves. And that's very
good. An elementary teacher needs to know a lot
about a lot of things to be a good teacher. Because
an elementary teacher is a lot of things. And
there's nothing worse than to have somebody who
teaches misinformation to children. So it does
offer some excitement. I think that we will see
probably some major changes in the next five
years.
We will probably place more emphasis on graduate
studies and less on undergraduate studies. And I
predict that there will be a backlash because I
suspect that we will come up against a severe
teacher shortage as a result of that. Are we
already facing one? We already are facing one,
yes. And I think that what happened at the
legislature as a result of the parole commission
and so on was just totally wrong. They missed the
boat.
On the one hand, they're saying, you've got to
teach your children, your teacher candidates,
very solid content. They've got to have good
content. That's first and foremost. They've got
to be broadly educated. Then, they've got to know
how to teach. But especially beyond that, they've
got to know how to teach reading. They've got to
know how to diagnose kids who have learning
problems. They've got to be able to handle
children with special problems and needs. And
they've got to sit on ARD committees and do IEPs and
so on and so on. They've got to deal with children
with cross-cultural problems and bilingual
problems. They've got to have developmental
problems. And we're only going to give you 12 hours
to teach them all that. And it can't be done. They
can't pour on more and more things that you're
supposed to accomplish and give you less and less
time to do it. So they're working at
cross-purposes for themselves, and they're
driving the really good people in the profession
up the wall. Because we know we can't prepare
somebody adequately with 12 hours, six hours of
student teaching. It just won't work. And as we
view our program, it's not really very overloaded
right now with methods courses. Probably more
methods courses at the elementary level than the
secondary level. But at the secondary level, we
could use more methods courses because, for
instance, take somebody in mathematics. A
secondary teacher in mathematics can teach from
7th grade through 12th grade. That means
everything from remedial 7th grade math through
calculus. Now, you cannot teach somebody how to
teach all of that in one semester course. You can't
do it. You can't do it in two, for that matter. You
can do a whole course on how to teach algebra and a
whole course on how to teach geometry. And that
still leaves you with the arithmetic and the
remediation and the higher manner.
So some people just missed the boat on the
methodology courses. But this is political. It
always has been. I guess it's always going to be.
It's just too bad we can't. get a voice that keeps
trying to put some sort of rationality back into
the mix of things. But I foresee that we'll move
over to a five-year kind of program, pretty much.
And then we'll be forced by circumstances to move
back
to a four-year program. OK. Meanwhile, I think
we're learning more and more all the time about how
to teach better. I think that the
interest right now in establishing an empirical
knowledge base, a research base for teacher
education is very healthy. But we don't have a
research base for more than 20% of what we do. I
wrote a conference last week, or the week before,
and Walter Doyle from the University of Arizona
about quite clearly that the empirical data that
we've got is largely based for effective schools,
effective classrooms, on skill subjects and the
primary grades. You can't generalize that to all
the grades and all the subjects and all the
advanced levels of understanding. There
are a lot of things like that. So there's ferment to
get at the investigation of a number of these
things, and I think we'll be steadily asking
better questions and answering
better questions. Is this a philosophy or a
thought or a way of thinking that is different or is
specified, or is it just part of its goal and its
mission, just the same as it is for the college?
Does it have something different? I
kind of think it has a unique...
philosophy, undergraduate level. Well, I don't
know. At all three levels. I think we have tried
especially hard. And I don't know that we're
unique in this, but we have tried especially hard
to maintain the Aggie tradition of caring about
every student, which has been very hard to do. When
I came here in 69, I knew every secondary major by
name and face. I advised every single one of them
the first year I was here. We now have something
like 1,400 undergraduate majors. And more than
that, because we've got over 2,000 majors in this
department, and only about 500 of them, I guess, or
less, are graduate students. So it's very hard to
be personal with that many people. And that puts a
lot of strain on the people that have that
philosophy but can only spread themselves so
thin. And we've been wrestling and wrestling and
wrestling with the question of how to cut the
numbers down so that we can do our job better and
relate to our students more effectively. But
beyond that, at the graduate level, we carried a
belief that there ought to be
education beneath specialization. That is, we
have at both masters and doctoral level some
required core courses that people for each degree
must take, regardless of whether they're going to
specialize in reading or mathematics education
or science education or social studies or
whatever.